# Project#1:Data Modeling with Postgres

## Introduction 
A startup called Sparkify wants to analyze the data they've been collecting on songs and user activity on their new music streaming app. The analytics team is particularly interested in understanding what songs users are listening to. Currently, they don't have an easy way to query their data, which resides in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

## Project Discreption 
In this project we will create a Postgres database with tables designed to optimize queries on song play analysis. We will create a database schema and ETL pipeline for this analysis.

### First: Creating Database Schema:

1. Datasets:
First of all the data we have are actually two sets:
1.Song data: it is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.

`{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}`


2.Log data: The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.

2. Schema for Song Play Analysis:

Using the song and log datasets, we will create a star schema optimized for queries on song play analysis. This includes the following tables.

1. Fact Table:
songplays: records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong
songplay_id (SERIAL) , start_time(TIMESTAMP), user_id (varchar), level (text) , song_id (text), artist_id (text), session_id (int), location (varchar), user_agent (varchar)
Primary Key=songplay_id 

2. Dimension Tables:
- users: users in the app
user_id (varchar) , first_name(varchar), last_name(varchar), gender(char), level(text) 
Primary Key=user_id 

- songs: songs in music database
song_id (text), title(text), artist_id (text) , year (int), duration (float)
Primary Key=song_id

- artists: artists in music database
artist_id(text), name(text), location (text), latitude (float), longitude (float)
Primary Key=artist_id

- time: timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units
start_time (TIMESTAMP), hour (int), day(text), week(text), month, year (int), weekday (text)
Primary Key=start_time

### Second: ETL Pipline:
The etl.ipynb file included a detalied steps of how the pipline was built. 


### Third: How to run the project :
To run the project successfully you will need to understand the project's files :

1. **test.ipynb** displays the first few rows of each table to let you check your database.

2. **create_tables.py** drops and creates your tables. You run this file to reset your tables before each time you run your ETL scripts.

3. **etl.ipynb** reads and processes a single file from song_data and log_data and loads the data into your tables. This notebook contains detailed instructions on the ETL process for each of the tables.

4. **etl.py** reads and processes files from song_data and log_data and loads them into your tables.

5. **sql_queries.py**contains all your sql queries, and is imported into the last three files above.

6. **README.md** provides discussion on the project.

First, run the create_tables.py file as the following:

`python3 create.tables.py`

then, run the etl.py file as the following:

`python3 etl.py`

## Refrences 
1. Pandas Documantation 
https://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/

2. PostgreSQL 
https://www.postgresql.org/

3. Github 
